[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Can you imagine watching
your 16-year-old child die
of a heart attack after
having a routine root canal?
That's exactly what happened to
pioneer dentist, Weston Price,
and why you need to think twice
before you or your loved one
considers getting a root canal.
Joining us again is biological
dentist, Dr. Blanche Grube,
who will tell us more
about the dangers
of this common procedure,
the root canal.
Thanks for being
here, Dr. Blanche.
>> Thank you very much, Dr. Ed.
>> So what exactly
is the root canal?
We have some images
here on the screen
we'd like you to go through.
>> OK, well, before we
talk about the root canal,
we have to talk
about the cavity.
Because most root
canals are, quote,
necessary by dentists when
there is decay, and the decay
is so large and
so deep that it's
into the nerve of the tooth.
So let's back up a
little bit and talk
about cavities, all right?
When you have bacterial
colonies forming
on the surface of
a tooth, they begin
to travel through the
enamel into the next layer
of the tooth which
is called the dentin.
You can see that on
our picture here.
The dentin is a little bit
softer than the enamel.
So the bacteria like
it, it's easier to eat,
and then as they start heading
further down into the tooth,
they head towards the
pulp of the tooth which
is where the blood vessels are.
You have your arteries, your
veins, even some lymphatics,
a few white blood cells are
in the pulp of the tooth.
Bacteria like that just
like they like the heart.
They like places
where it's warm,
and there's lots of free food.
So when a dentist
looks at an x-ray,
if they see decay on the
enamel surface of the tooth,
very often, they will call
that incipient decay or just
beginning decay and tell
the patient to floss it.
We'll keep an eye on it.
Seldom will they say,
yes, we have to fill this.
We were taught in dental
school that you only
say it's a cavity when that
decay is through the enamel
and into the dentin.
Well, that's a very
interesting thing
because if you take a look at
the work of Weston Price back
in the 1920s and 1930s, Dr.
Price proved with a microscope
that if the decay is halfway
the distance from the surface
of the enamel to the pulp,
halfway the distance,
that pulp is already infected.
Well, wow, halfway between
the enamel and the pulp,
well, that's the
dentin, which means
that when most dentists
diagnose a cavity,
that pulp in that tooth
is already infected.
And if it's infected, it's
almost impossible for the body
to get rid of that infection.
I don't know why,
but God made teeth
different from the
rest of the body.
Doctor Ed, if you were to
cut your arm right now,
you know that there's
enough circulation
in your arm for the
white blood cells
to come, eat up whatever
bacteria are in that cut,
add some more fibrous
tissue, and before you
know it, within two
weeks, the cut is gone,
and you have perfect skin again.
Correct?
And that's true of
most of the body.
If you injure yourself,
we expect it to heal.
But that doesn't
happen with teeth.
Why is it that when
we get a cavity,
and it enters through the enamel
into the dentin into the pulp,
it never heals?
There's not enough
circulation in a tooth.
The white blood cells cannot
fit into that teeny little hole
at the bottom of a
tooth, rush up in there,
clean up the bacteria,
and lay down new tooth.
It simply doesn't
happen, which I
can't help believing that it
was never God's intention for us
to eat the amount of sugar
that we eat these days.
If you look at cavemen,
cavemen did not
have the number of cavities
that we have today.
Why?
Because they didn't
eat the amount of sugar
that we eat today.
I mean, I grew up in
Brooklyn, New York.
There was a candy
store on every corner.
As soon as you got a dime,
you ran to the candy store
and bought a little,
brown bag full of candy.
Kids today don't even have
to run to the candy store.
Their mothers go to
the grocery aisle.
Tell me, what civilization
has an aisle full of candy?
Everything from chocolates to
sucking candies to bubblegum,
and the parents buy
these bags by the pound.
Once the decay is into the
pulp, if there's a lot of decay,
the patient will know it because
they'll have sensitivity.
The tooth will hurt, and then
the dentist might look at this,
and after the bacteria
have eaten up the pulp,
and have eaten up
everything down the canal,
well, then remember I
said before, bacteria
produce piss and poop, toxins,
and they also produce gas.
The gas at the end
of the root begins
to put pressure on the bone.
When that happens,
the bone dissolves.
If I was to put my nail
and press on my arm here,
and if I left my
nail and my finger
on my arm for about two
months, when I took it off
there would be an
indentation in my bone
because I've put pressure on it.
Well, the same thing
happens in the mouth.
Those gases put
pressure on the bone,
and then when the dentist
looks at the x-ray,
the dentist will say
you have an infection,
or you have an abscess,
which is not 100% true,
but it's good enough.
What the dentist is actually
looking at is lack of bone
produced by the gases produced
by the microorganisms that
have already eaten up the
pulp and have eaten up all
of the tissue in the canal.
At that point, the dentist
says to the patient,
you need a root canal.
>> We can see on the X-ray
here, can you explain?
>> Yes, this is a tooth
that has had a root canal.
So you can see this is a molar.
It's an upper molar.
The upper molar has
three canals mostly.
It also has lots of sideways
canals, what we call
in dentistry accessory canals.
But primarily, it has
three major canals.
So the dentist had taken
the middle of that tooth,
drilled a hole, and cleaned
out the middle canal.
Then the dentist went ahead and
cleaned out of that side canal,
and then cleaned out the
other side canal that goes
towards the back.
When the dentist thought that
that major canal was filled
and cleaned well
enough, then they
fill it with the rubbery
material gutta-percha.
Some people say gutta-percha.
Either way, it's a pink, rubbery
material off a Malaysian tree
called gutta-percha.
He mixes that
gutta-percha with cement
and then fills it
up into the canal.
What is the dentist
thinking at that point?
What's their intention?
They actually believe that
they have sterilized the tooth.
That's their first false belief.
And then secondly, they
believe that they're
sealing the tooth by filling
it with gutta-percha.
Neither one of those
things are true.
Absolutely not true.
>> And just to recap, when
you were talking about all
the sugar, we're talking about
refined, man-made, toxic sugar.
>> The white stuff.
>> Not God's sugar that you're
going to find in fresh fruits
and different types
of natural products.
>> You can take a machete and
cut off a piece of sugar cane
and suck on it all day long,
and it's not going to give you
decay.
Why?
Because that raw sugar cane
is also loaded with minerals.
Sugar tends to eat up
minerals in our body.
But if you're having raw
sugar, raw sugar cane,
you're providing your body
with those same minerals again.
You don't get decay.
>> At the beginning of the show,
we talked about Weston Price,
and the root canals
that he was doing.
Can you elaborate on his son,
and the death of his son?
What exactly happened?
>> Well, obviously, his son
must have either had candy,
had sugar, or perhaps he
was in a traumatic accident,
and somebody punched
him in the face.
You can kill a tooth that way.
You can break a tooth by
crunching on a piece of ice.
OK, so there's two ways
of killing a tooth.
Not just sugar.
You can also kill it with
some kind of traumatic event.
That must be what happened
to Weston Price's son.
By the way, his name was Donald.
So then Weston-- what
most people don't know
is that Weston Price himself did
the root canal on his own son.
And so when his son died of a
heart attack one week later,
he made the connection.
How many people would
make the connection?
Most people would be
just filled with grief,
but he made the connection
and thought perhaps
there's something in
the root canal that
caused my 16-year-old son
to die of a heart attack.
So this is what
fascinates me even more.
He actually extracted the
tooth from his son's body
before he buried his son,
and then he took that tooth
and put it in the
ear of a rabbit,
and the rabbit died of a
heart attack within 24 hours.
Now, being a true
scientist, a true scientist
knows they have to repeat
the experiment over
and over and over to
get clarification.
He took that same
tooth and put it
in the ear of another
rabbit, and that rabbit
died of a heart attack
within 24 hours.
He did 200 rabbits.
All 200 rabbits died of a
heart attack within 24 hours.
>> That's pretty convincing
evidence that the root canal
has something to do--
>> Had something to do
with the heart attack.
Then he began to
look at patients
who had serious disorders,
serious diseases,
and they had root canals.
He would extract
their root canal
and put it in the
ear of a rabbit.
Now, if the patient
had diabetes,
the rabbit developed diabetes.
If the patient had
rheumatoid arthritis,
the rabbit would develop
and so he knew there was
definitely a connection,
and he knew that the rabbit
died of the same disease
the patient had.
Therefore, the patient must
have had a weak genetic link
with whatever organ it
was, and so something
was attacking their
weak genetic link
and causing that disease
to manifest itself.
Correct?
At that time, he didn't know
what that something was.
Unfortunately, it
wasn't until years
later that a fellow by
the name of Josef Issols
was able to let us know that
there are chemicals produced
by the microorganisms in
the bacteria in root canals
that caused the problem.
>> Oh, wow, I mean, the trauma
that he probably went through
knowing that he gave his
own son the root canal,
but then being able to make that
connection and find out that it
actually was the root canal that
caused his son's death and then
think about how many people
have been saved since those
findings.
>> He dedicated the rest of his
life to studying root canals,
and he had a group of
scientists working with him.
It wasn't just Weston Price.
It wasn't just
one mad scientist.
No, he had people like
Charles Mayo, the Mayo Clinic.
Edward Rosenow.
Dr. Vaughn was the president
of the American Medical
Association.
He was one of the scientists
working with Weston Price.
So this was not some
sleazy, little team
of crazy scientists.
Not at all.
These were the leading
scientists and doctors
of the day, and they
all knew that there
was something terribly
wrong with root canals.
And Rosenow was the
first one to say,
we have got to stop
doing root canals.
>> So that's a pretty amazing
and shocking and sad story
at the same time.
So tell us about Dr. Huggins
research on root canals.
>> OK, well, let me back up
a little bit and give you
a little bit of
interesting history.
Before Weston price passed
away, he had given a trunk--
you know the old-fashioned trunk
that we used to take to camp?
He had given a trunk full
of his latest research
to a friend of his
and asked his friend
to give it to somebody who he
knew would carry on his work.
He didn't have
anybody at that time.
His friend held on to that
trunk until he reached old age,
and then his friend
went to a lecture
where Dr. Huggins was
talking about nutrition
and how nutrition affected
periodontal disease
and the health of the body.
And the gentleman-- I don't know
his name-- but the gentleman
said, this is who I'm
going to give the trunk to.
He literally went straight to
his house, knocked on the door,
and said here, this is for you.
And so Weston Price's work was--
I don't know how you say it.
I mean, they didn't know
each other physically,
but it was transmitted
to Hal Huggins,
and he inherited all of the
research from Dr. Weston Price.
So years later, Dr.
Huggins was still
battling with the
question of what
is it in a root canal tooth
that makes the person sick?
What is it that causes
disease in a root canal tooth?
We knew they were
toxins being produced,
and not everybody knew
exactly what those toxins are.
Now, we do know
what the toxins are,
but we didn't even know
the names of the bacteria
until Dr. Huggins went to
the University of Colorado
to get master's in immunology.
And while he was at the
University of Colorado,
he learned about
DNA, and how you
could extract the DNA
of a microorganism
and look at the DNA bank that we
have here in the United States.
Now the whole world uses
GenBank where they have actually
been able to not only
lay out the genetic print
for the human genome--
you know about that--
but they've also laid
out the genetic print
for almost every microorganism
in every plant on the planet.
So Dr. Huggins began looking at
the DNA of the microorganisms
in root canal, and
that's how we came along
with the laboratory, which at
first was called dental DNA.
We were looking at
the microorganisms
in root canals and gum
disease, and then DNA
was doing very well.
We were looking at all
these microorganisms.
One day, Dr. Blanche Grube,
myself, I sent a root canal
tooth from one of my
patients had the laboratory
in Colorado Springs.
And two weeks later,
everybody calls me up.
They're all excited.
So what's going on?
They said, Dr. Grube,
did you know that we
found Borrelia burgdorferi.
That's the microorganism
that causes Lyme Disease.
We found Borrelia burgdorferi
in one of the root canals
that you sent us.
Amazing.
How did the microorganism
that caused Lyme disease
get inside of a
root canal tooth,
and how did it stay
there and multiply
enough to make the patient
sick with Lyme disease
and for us to be able to
detect it in the laboratory?
It's just an incredible
path of coincidences?
I don't think so.
>> So you're saying that Dr.
Huggins had this information
for a long time.
He didn't know about the
rabbit study or any of that
until he opened up the box?
>> Until he opened the box.
>> Wow.
>> And he opened the box simply
because somebody else asked him
if he was familiar with
the work of Weston Price.
And suddenly the light
went off in his head,
and he said, where have
I heard that name before?
Oh, yes, the box.
And that's when he
started studying,
and one of the first books
that Dr. Huggins wrote
was called The Price--
meaning Weston Price, "The
Price of Root Canals".
>> Well, let's take a look.
Here's Dr. Huggins
speaking on root canals.
>> What we did was we'd take out
a root canal tooth because we
were finding that the root
canal tooth would seem to be
an initiating or at least a
contributing factor to a lot
of the diseases of,
quote, "unknown origin".
Unknown etiology, in other
words, where is it coming from.
And so if we take these
teeth out and examine
the root, the bottom
third down here,
we found a whole
lot of bacteria,
and these are kind of
dangerous bacteria.
And then a year or
two later, I decided
if the bacteria really
coming through those
tubules to the
periodontal ligament, what
does the ligament contain?
So we would cut off the
ligament and test that,
and we found more
bacteria in the ligament.
Now, you can't get to
that to sterilize it
without taking the tooth out.
And then about 10
years later, I got
the idea, what do you suppose
is going on in the bone
outside of the tooth?
So we take the tooth
out, and then you
have to use a dental bur
to cut out the ligament.
A lot of dentists will
just try to scrape it out
with a little instrument that
scrapes, and what that does
is to push the bacteria into
the bone into the bloodstream.
So if you do that, people
get a whole lot sicker.
All right, so we take the
tooth out, take a bur,
cut out the
periodontal ligament,
let it bleed for a little bit,
and then take the blood sample
there.
We found a whole
lot more bacteria.
So sterilizing the
tooth is something
that is not only impossible,
but it can't be done.
>> Sounds like there's a lot
of dangers involved with root
canals.
What have you seen, or what
are your comments on that?
>> Well, of course, for me,
the most important patient
in the whole world was myself.
I had five root canal
teeth, and I had cancer.
I had chronic
myeloblastic leukemia.
I had my root canal
teeth removed,
and my leukemia disappeared
literally overnight.
I mean, that says
something, and I've
seen many, many patients
who have root canals
and have problems.
Now, I know there
are a lot of people
who are going to be watching
this show who are going to say,
well, just because there's
an association, doesn't mean
it's cause and effect.
And so yes, I agree with you.
It doesn't always
mean cause and effect,
but you can't help but get
suspicious when I literally
have thousands of
patients coming
through my office in the
last 28 years with cancer.
And every single one of them
has a root canal or cavitation,
which we'll talk about later.
Every single one.
There has to be some kind of
association between the two.
>> Is it just the procedure
that's dangerous that
conventional dentists are using?
>> No, it's not
just the procedure.
It actually, literally doesn't
matter what kind of procedure
they do.
It doesn't matter if they
do a conventional root
canal with gutta-percha
and toxic cements.
It doesn't matter if they do
a so-called biological root
canal.
There's some holistic
dentists out there
that advertise they
do a biological root
canal with calcium hydroxide.
Well, those root canals
have shown themselves
to be just as toxic
if not more toxic
than the conventional
root canals.
So it's not the procedure.
It's not how the
root canal is done.
It's the fact that you cannot
keep the tooth sterile after
the root canal is done.
So the longer the root canal is
in the mouth, the more toxins
you have, the more
bacteria you have,
but bacteria produce toxins.
It's literally that
simple, and those toxins
are toxins that the body
is not able to metabolize.
There's one called
dimethyl sulfate.
Dimethyl sulfate comes
out of a root canal tooth
and embeds itself into the
tissue that is not cells,
not blood vessels, not nerves.
What we call the
mesenchymal tissue.
Some people confuse it and say
it's the connective tissue.
Some people say it's
the ground substance.
It's everything
that's not a cell.
It sits in that area.
It accumulates in that area.
The body cannot metabolize it.
>> Is that released
by a pathogen?
>> Yes, it's released by the
microorganisms inside the root
canal tooth.
We were not able to know what
were those microorganisms.
We couldn't tell because
they were all anaerobic,
meaning they were non
air breathing bacteria.
So the minute you
took the tooth out,
and you're now in a room full of
oxygen, the bacteria would die.
You couldn't culture them.
There was no way
to tell what were
the microorganisms
in root canal teeth
that were causing the problem.
We couldn't do it because
they were mostly anaerobic,
non air breathing bacteria.
But then when Dr.
Huggins discovered,
well, wait a minute.
We can look at the DNA.
When you're looking
at the DNA, it
doesn't matter if it's an
aerobic bacteria or anaerobic.
Doesn't matter.
The DNA is the DNA.
>> Are there a group of certain,
very common pathogens that you
see in the majority of
time or does it matter?
>> Yes, there are certain
pathogens that we see
consistently in a lot
of the root canals,
and they are the bad boys.
They're the non air breathing--
E coli, everybody
knows what that is.
Botuli, everybody
We didn't always expect to
see Borrelia burgdorferi.
The bacteria that
cause Lyme disease,
but we've actually
seen bacteria that
cause every disease
that you can possibly
imagine inside the root
canal so which comes first?
The disease or the root canal?
>> Well, we actually have some
photos of root canals so if you
could talk us through
a couple of these,
we would appreciate it.
>> Great.
>> Oh.
>> Yeah, so this is not for
the weak-stomached people.
You may want to get the
children out of the room.
>> Tell us about that
one on the left there.
>> The one on the left is a
tooth that had root canal,
and you can see the orange
material is that gutta-percha
or gutta-percha, that rubbery
material that I told you about.
So the dentist heated
up the gutta-percha,
made the rubber get
soft so that it would
fill the inside of the canal.
Unfortunately, when the rubber
cools down, it contracts.
All rubbers contract
when they cool down.
And so once it cooled
down, then the bacteria
had lots of space, lots
of room to move around.
Now, the main blood
vessels are destroyed
going into a tooth when
a root canal is done.
So the tooth becomes
more brittle with time.
So after you've had
a root canal done,
the dentist will
tell you that you now
need to have a post, which is a
piece of metal that is screwed
into the large
canal, and then you
have to have a tooth, a
crown, put on top of it.
So this tooth had-- you can
see-- it had a root canal.
You can see it had a post.
I'm not sure if you can see
it clearly in this picture.
You see that piece of metal
that is sticking right down.
That's the post.
>> OK.
>> And then it had a metal
crown put on top of it,
and this looks to me like it's
probably a porcelain fused
to metal crown.
>> So what type of metal
is that that they're using?
>> Oh, that's called porcelain
fused to who knows what
in my office because Dr. Huggins
began to research what was
the metal underneath these
porcelain fused to metal
crowns.
And so he called up the
maker of the ingots,
and the maker of
the ingots told him,
well, you have to go
call up these people who
make the crowns.
So he called up the people
who make the crowns,
and they said to
him, well, you have
to call up the people
who make the ingots,
and he kept going back
and forth, back and forth,
until finally, I think he
was able to grab somebody
by the throat and
say, listen, I want
to know where does the metal
come from for these crowns.
And somebody actually
did give him an address,
and he decided to
get in his car,
and he was going to
research it out himself,
and he kept driving and
driving and driving.
Until suddenly, he became
a little bit confused
because he was in the
middle of no man's land,
and the only thing he could see
in front of him was a junkyard.
Complete with junkyard
dogs barking and yelling.
And so he went into the
junkyard, and he said,
could you please tell me where
these ingots for dental crowns
are made?
And a fellow with a
cigar in his mouth
said, yeah, go in the back.
There's a lab in the back, and
he walked around to the back,
and there was this huge
pile of car bumpers.
Now, I'm old enough.
My first car was a
Chevy, and my Chevy
had an aluminum car bumper.
It was a mixture of aluminum,
and some other kinds of metals.
Nowadays, the car bumpers
are made out of plastic.
Well, they weren't
always like that.
They used to be
made out of metal,
and so here was this laboratory.
They were literally
melting car bumpers
and turning them into
cute little ingots
for the dental industry,
and Dr. Huggins was shocked.
And since then, we always
called it porcelain
fused to car bumper.
You know, I have patients
who will say to me
but, no, doctor, my crown
is porcelain fused to gold.
Well, there's no such thing as
pure gold in dentistry anymore.
Years ago, we used
to do gold foil.
That was 24-karat gold.
Not anymore.
Gold has to have other
materials added to it,
because otherwise,
it's too soft.
So they add silver.
They add copper.
They add nickel to make it hard.
They add copper to
make it look like gold.
So there's no such thing
as pure gold anymore.
So when somebody says,
oh, I have porcelain
fused to gold crown, I
give a little chuckle,
and say, yeah, not really.
Not really.
So that's your
typical root canal,
and if you take a look
carefully at that picture,
you'll notice how
black and dark it
is in the middle of
those three roots.
That's the area
where in this tooth
the microorganisms
were producing the most
number of -thyl ethers.
Those are the chemicals
that I was telling you
about like dimethyl sulfate.
Dimethyl sulfate
is a -thyl ether.
So until somebody
can figure out how
to sterilize that tooth in
the mouth and keep it sterile,
then I will still
continue telling people
that they should not
have a root canal.
And if they have a root canal,
have it extracted, and have it
extracted the right way.
>> OK, what about this one?
>> OK, so this is a root canal
tooth where the bacteria had
already finished eating up
the inside of the tooth,
and so now, they were producing
those gases and making
an abscess at the
end of the tooth.
And so now at this
point, this is
when the tooth is most toxic
because the toxins are entering
directly into the bloodstream.
You know, the tooth is a
very interesting organ.
Half of the tooth is outside,
or one third of the tooth
is outside the mouth.
The mouth is actually
outside the body,
and the other 2/3 of the
tooth is inside the body.
So it's actually two separate
kinds of tissue in the body.
I very often tell patients,
picture a balloon.
And if I was to take my finger
and press inside a balloon
and push it all
the way to the end,
is my finger inside
the balloon or is
my finger outside the balloon?
>> Outside the balloon.
>> Correct, very good, and I
hadn't rehearsed you for this
one.
Your finger is
outside the balloon.
Well, when the egg and
the sperm come together
and make one cell, that
cell divides in half.
And now, we have two cells,
and those cells divide.
Now, we have got four cells.
And those cells divide,
and they continue dividing
until we have a ball of cells.
That's called the blastomere.
And then somewhere in
this whole process,
God-given process, the
outside of the ball indurates,
just like I did with the balloon
and my finger as we imagined.
It indurates and goes
through that ball of cells.
This part of that ball
of cells is the mouth.
of cells is the anus.
So from the mouth
to the anus, we're
actually outside the body.
>> That's right.
That's right.
So you recommend everybody
get their root canals removed,
correct?
>> Absolutely, only if you want
to live a long, healthy life.
If you don't care, then
keep your root canal.
>> So what exactly is involved
in a safe root canal removal?
>> I'm glad you
asked that question.
The very first thing
the patient must
have is IV vitamin C on board.
So why do I say that?
Because no matter
what the dentist does,
no matter how gentle
the dentist is,
when you take a pair
of forceps, and you
begin to rock a
root canal tooth,
all those toxins that
Dr. Huggins talked
about that travel from the tooth
to the periodontal ligament
to the bone are now entering
into the circulation.
>> And you prep the
patient for this, like,
the whole procedure.
They're down.
You've talked to them before.
>> Oh, absolutely.
>> You're doing the vitamin C,
and you're letting them know
exactly how the process
is going to work.
>> They get vitamin
C on board first,
then when we take out the root
canal, we do exactly as Dr.
Huggins taught.
We remove the ligament that
held the tooth to the bone,
and we remove another millimeter
to sometimes two millimeters
of bone.
>> So do you do DNA testing as
well before the root canal is
removed or--
>> If the patient requests it.
Most of the time, we
just do the DNA testing
after the tooth is extracted.
But if we have somebody
who is very apprehensive,
and they really don't
want to lose teeth,
but they want to live, and they
want to live a healthy life.
So here's a conundrum.
What do they do?
So some people will
actually have the tooth
tested with super floss.
Send that super floss
to DNA connections,
and we will tell them if that
root canal tooth has these very
virulent, toxic bacteria in it.
You can actually tell before
you have the tooth taken out.
>> It's amazing what
technology is able to do today,
and we recently visited the
DNA connections lab in Colorado
Springs.
Take a look.
>> Let's do it.
Come on.
This is the laboratory
where they discovered
the microorganisms that cause
Lyme disease in one of the root
canal teeth that I sent here.
So Dr. Douglas, what would
you like to show us first?
>> Well, I was just going to
start inoculating some oral
panels.
That means we have a plate of
the 88 microbes on the panel
that we are going to add the
DNA and all of our controls,
and then we're going to run
it through the thermal cycler
and perform the polymerase chain
reaction to see what organisms
are in the samples
that we've received
from biological dentists
across the country.
Once they take digital images,
we upload them to the computer,
and we take all
of the positives,
and we record them into our
proprietary software called
Alpha Five, and it'll generate a
report of the microbes present,
and the overall risk factors
associated with the presence
of that microbe.
Now, this is a
typical oral panel
report for a root canal sample.
This practitioner sent
us the root canal tooth
and surrounding blood,
and what you see
is the different
colored bars represent
the relative risk
associated with each microbe
that we found.
And that is, again, based on
the organism's characteristics--
its overall virulence and
pathogenicity-- as well as
the amount of organism that
we were able to amplify
from the sample.
Three of those
organisms in that genus
are involved in metabolic
issues, pregnancy issues,
cancer issues, cognitive
ability issues.
We have streptococcus in here.
Strep mitis, strep mutants,
strep intermediates,
and all of those
are directly related
to a propensity
for cardiac issues.
>> So now that you've had a
tour of the DNA laboratory,
and you see how incredibly
specific and scientific every
teeny, little step is, and you
can see how exact our science
is.
Now, you know enough
to tell the doctors.
>> Thanks, again, Dr. Blanche,
for allowing us to be the first
to go behind the scenes
of DNA Connections.
It's so empowering
to see the technology
and to give people something
that they can see and work off
of that they now
know, hey, maybe
this is what's been causing
my health situation.
>> Sure, sure.
You know, Dr. Huggins
always used to say,
what's more important?
The life of the tooth, or
the life of the patient?
All over the world, they're
looking at root canals.
They're looking at the toxins
produced by root canals,
and they're looking at the
relationship between root
canals and disease.
>> So what does the ADA have
to say about the safety of root
canals?
>> They think they're just fine.
I had to take a courage pill to
come on board to do this show
and to allow all of you to
come into the laboratory
and actually see
what it is we do.
I guess I finally
matured, and I've
reached the point in my
life where my life is not
as important as
everybody else's life,
and that's a point of
maturity for people.
I reached that point.
My life is not as important
as everybody else's life,
and people have to know.
So my goal is to teach as many
dentists and as many laypeople
as I can about the
truth about dentistry.
>> That was beautifully said.
Thank you so much for sharing
all of your information
with us.
Tell us about the
documentary, "The Root Cause".
>> It's an excellent,
excellent film.
The only part of that
film that I didn't like
was that they didn't include me.
I was just a little too
busy at the time when they--
>> Well, let's take a
look at the trailer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's no branch of medicine
that exists where a dead organ
is left in except in dentistry
where a root canal is left in.
If you think that
you can get away
with an infected,
toxic tooth and not
have a systemic consequence, I
think you're deluding yourself.
>> The vast majority of chronic
degenerative diseases begin
with problems in the mouth.
>> Unfortunately, the dental
schools look at the mouth
as being a mannequin and
that you can do any type
of procedure without any direct
impact on the rest of the body,
but this is the farthest
thing from the truth.
>> Of the people that come to
see them with chronic illness,
the question is, how many
of them have a dental cause
of their illness?
I would say almost all of them.
>> Currently, we have roughly
25 million new root canal
procedures being done a
year in the United States.
One of the greatest public
health interventions
we could possibly do is to
make the root canal procedure
something of the
past, because it
does nothing positive for the
general health of the body
at all.
>> I'd like to say one more
thing about that film though.
Do you notice that he didn't
get sick right away after having
the root canal done.
He had the root canal done after
the fight with the young man,
and he was a young man.
It wasn't until years later
he started getting symptoms,
and that's exactly what happens.
People don't walk out
of a dental office
and drop dead because they
just had a root canal.
It takes years for the bacteria
to build up, for the toxins
to build up to the point where
they begin to get symptoms,
and that's what makes
it so difficult,
to make that connection
between the root
canals and your illness.
>> And everybody's
different too.
>> And everybody is different.
That's right.
>> Well, thanks
again, Dr. Blanche.
>> You're very welcome.
>> In this episode, we've
learned all about the truly
hazardous consequences
of root canals.
In the next episode, we'll
explore two more very
common dental practices,
cavitations and implants.
I'm Dr. Edward Group.
Thank you for watching
"Healing Matrix".
[MUSIC PLAYING]